# INTRODUCTION

System Identification is concerned with developing mathematical models from observed data, and
therefore a subject based on observational (data) science. It is at the heart of all data-driven or
measurement-based process operations, namely, design, control and monitoring where models play
a critical role. The idea of learning from observations is timeless. The technicalities of this subject as
we see today, however, have its seeds in some of the eighteenth and nineteenth century mathematics
and probability theory. It has now grown into a remarkably vast tree with several branches and subbranches.
This text is designed to provide a knowledge of the grassroots and a bird’s eye view of the
tree while mostly dwelling on one branch called the linear system identification. A quick tour of a
few far (advanced) branches is presented in the final part of the text.

## WHAT IS SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION?

Identification is the exercise of developing a mathematical relationship (model) between the
causes (inputs) and the effects (outputs) of a system (process) based on observed or measured
data. Stated otherwise, identification establishes a mathematical map between the input and
output spaces as determined by the data.

## THREE FACTS ABOUT SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION

1. It is generally not possible to build an accurate model from finite-sample data.
2. It is generally not possible to estimate a precise model from finite-sample data
3. The accuracy and precision of the optimally identified model, among other factors, is critically dependent on the
      a. Input data
      b. signal-to-noise ratio

## 1.4 What is a model?

A model of a process is broadly defined as that entity which can emulate the characteristics of
that process for a given set of operating conditions and parameters.

## TYPES OF MODELS
### QUANTITATIVE MODELS VS QUALITATIVE MODELS

Qualitative models, as the name suggests, merely describe the response of a system on a categorical
basis with little or no involvement of numerical values. For example, when the heat input to a fluid
heating system is increased, the temperature of the fluid increases; or when the product draw in
a distillation column is increased, the purity of the top product decreases and so on.

Quantitative models, on the other hand, describe the relationship between quantified changes in input and output
in terms of mathematical expressions.

Quantitative models can be further categorized into dIfferent pairs of classes depending on the
nature of the processes they describe, the assumptions made about the underlying phenomena and
the approach taken to develop them. We have already encountered two contrasting classes, namely,
the first-principles vs. empirical models in Section 1.1. Two additional classifications that are frequently
encountered in the identification literature are discussed below.

#### Deterministic vs. Stochastic models

The model that explains the effects of inputs is usually termed as a deterministic model, 
while the model that explains the effects of disturbances and sensor noise is termed as a 
stochastic model.

#### Non-Parametric vs. Parametric Models

Parametric models possess a specific structure and order and are characterized by fewer parameters
while non-parametric models do not possess any specific structure or order but are characterized
by a large number of unknowns. Difference equation descriptions are common examples of the former
class while convolution models (impulse response models) are examples of the latter. From an
identification viewpoint, non-parametric models can be estimated with minimal a priori knowledge
while the estimation of parametric models demands some a priori knowledge on the user’s part.
This prior knowledge can be acquired by first estimating a non-parametric model.

## SYSTEMATIC IDENTIFICATION

The procedure for identification can be divided into five salient steps, namely:

1. Data generation and acquisition.
2. Data preprocessing.
3. Data visualization.
4. Model building.
5. Model assessment and validation.


