# INFORMATION-RICH INPUTS
## INTRODUCTION

The objective is to present the principles of input design for system identification.
This is concered with generating appropriate input data for system identification which
is information-rich and cost-effective so we can discriminate between models of different
complexity.

## INFORMATION-RICH INPUTS

In order to resolve between models of different complexity, we need information-rich inputs.
This is a summary of the role of inputs in system identification:

1. The input governs the information content in the data with respect to the unknowns of interest.
2. It determines the way the process appears to the observer and the estimation algorithm.
3. The frequency content of the input governs the number of parameters that are identifiable or the
dimensionality of the identifiable model.
4. The strength of the input relative to noise significantly influences the precision of parameter
estimates.

Intuitively, inputs should contain as many frequencies as possible to maximize the “information”
thereby theoretically assuring identifiability. An experiment is “informative” if it allows us to resolve
between two candidate models.

In order to derive the input properties that guarantee identifiability, we need to first define what is
meant by informative data. The data is said to be informative enough when predictions with a given
data are identical (on the average), which occurs only when the corresponding predictor filters are
equal.

If the input spectrum is zero at some frequency, then there is no way of distinguishing between
the two plant models at that frequency.

This leads to the concept of persistent excitation.

### Persistent Excitation

It is clear that if a fine distinction between models is desired, the inputs should have as many frequencies
as possible. Of course it is not possible to inject a continuum of frequencies and therefore
models can only be resolved within a small region.
When the input, specifically its spectral density, contains almost all frequencies, it is said to be
persistently exciting.

In practice, however, we may use inputs that contain only a set of frequencies over a band. Consequently,
we can only distinguish between models of certain orders. An input of single frequency can estimate two parameters.

Extending this idea, as the number of frequencies in the input increases, the ability to discriminate or
resolve between models of higher-orders increases.


